blog post on end to end sql (#299)
apache/flink-web: _posts/2020-01-30-end-to-end-sql.md

---
layout: post
title: "End to End Streaming with Pure SQL"
date:  2020-01-30 12:00:00
categories: news
authors:
- seth:
  name: "Seth Wiesman"
  twitter: "sjwiesman"

excerpt: This post discusses the efforts of the Flink community as they relate to end to end applications with SQL in Apache Flink.
---

# Introduction

The recent Apache Flink 1.10 release includes many exciting features.

> In particular it marks the end of the community's year-lng effort to merge in the Blink SQL contribution from Alibaba.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, it marks the end of the community's year-long effort to merge in the [Blink SQL contribution](https://flink.apache.org/news/2019/02/13/unified-batch-streaming-blink.html) from Alibaba.
```

The reason the community chose to spend so much time on the contribution is that SQL works.
It allows Flink to offer a truly unified interface over batch and streaming and makes stream processing accessible to a broad audience of developers and analysts.
Best of all, Flink SQL is ANSI-SQL compliant, which means if you've ever used a database in the past, you already know it[^1]!

> While much of the work focused on improved runtime performance and greater coverage of the standard, some features focused on ease of use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While much of the work focused on improving runtime performance and progressively extending the Flink SQL syntax, a lot of development also went into improving some existing pain points like data and metadata management.
```

> Create table statements and catalogs are two such features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support for DDL statements (e.g. `CREATE TABLE`, `DROP TABLE`) and refactoring the catalog interface are two such developments.
```

# Accessing Your Data Where It Lives

Flink does not store data at rest; it is a compute engine and requires other systems to consume input from and write its output.
Those that have used Flink's `DataStream` API in the past will be familiar with connectors that allow for interacting with external systems. 

> Flink has a vast connector ecosystem that includes all major message queues, filesystems, and databaes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flink has a vast connector ecosystem that includes all major message queues, filesystems, and databases.
```

<div class="alert alert-info">
If your favorite system does not have a connector maintained in the central Apache Flink repository, check out the <a href="https://flink-packages.org">flink packages website</a>, which has a growing number of community-maintained components.
</div>

While these connectors are battle-tested and production-ready, they are written in Java and configured in code, which means they are not amenable to pure SQL or Table applications.
Relational queries should execute against relational tables.

> # Create Table Statements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Creating Table Statements
```

> # Create Table Statements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# CREATE TABLE Statements
```

While Flink SQL has long provided table abstractions on top some of Flink's most popular connectors, configurations were not always so straight forward.

> Begining in 1.10, Flink supports defining tables through `CREATE TABLE` statements.

Author: I think it was beta in 1.9(?) I'll doubl check

With this feature, users can now create logical tables, backed by varous external systems, in pure SQL. 

This means you can define a logical table which can be read from or written to, that is abstracted away from its physical data store.

> Coupled with Flink SQL's unified approach to batch and stream processing, Flink provides a straight line from discovery to production.

Author: I can link to one of the notebook demos here.

Users can define tables over static data sets, anything from a local CSV file to a full-fledged data lake or even Hive.
Leveraging Flink's efficient batch processing capabilities, they can perform ad-hoc queries searching for exciting insights.
Once something interesting is identified, buisnesses can gain real-time and continous insights by merely altering the table so that it is powered by a message queue such as Kafka.

> Because Flink guaruntees SQL queries have unified semantics over batch and streaming, users can be confident that redeploying this query as a continuous streaming application over a message queue will output identical results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because Flink guarantees SQL queries have unified semantics over batch and streaming, users can be confident that redeploying this query as a continuous streaming application over a message queue will output identical results.
```

Author: This is why I need to stop writing blog posts in Vim, thank you :)

-- on top of ElasticSearch 7 where  we 
-- can write the results of our query. 
CREATE TABLE product_analysis (
	product 	STRING,
	tracking_time 	TIMESTAMP(3),
	units_sold 	BIGINT
) WITH (
	'connector.type'    = 'elasticsearch',
	'connector.version' = '7',
	'connector.hosts'   = 'http://host_name:9092',
	'connector.index'   = 'ProductAnalysis',
	'connector.document.type' = 'analysis' 
);

-- A simple query that analyzes order data
-- from Kafka and writes results into 
-- ElasticSearch. 
INSERT INTO product_analysis
SELECT
	product_id,
	TUMBLE_START(order_time, INTERVAL '1' DAY) as tracking_time,
	COUNT(*) as units_sold
FROM orders
GROUP BY
	product_id,
	TUMBLE(order_time, INTERVAL '1' DAY);
{% endhighlight %}

# Catalogs

While being able to create tables is important, it often isn't enough.
A buisness analyst shouldn't have to know what properties to set for Kafka, or even have to know what the underlying data source is, to be able to write a query.

To solve this problem, Flink 1.10 also ships with a revamped catalog system for managing metadata about tables.
With catalogs, users can create tables once and reuse them across Jobs an Sessions.

> Now, the team managing a data set can create a table and immediatly make it accessible to other teams within their organization.

Author: Now hive was in beta, I'll rephrase.

The most notable catalog that ships with Flink today is Hive.
The Hive catalog allows Flink to fully interoperate with Hive and serve as a more efficient query engine.

# Looking Ahead

Flink SQL has made enormous strides to democratize stream processing and 1.10 marks a major milestone in that development.
However, we are not ones to rest on our laurels and the community is committed to raising the bar on stardards while lowering the barriers to entry.
The community is looking to add more catalogs, such as JDBC and Apache Pulsar.
We encourage you to sign up to the [mailing list](https://flink.apache.org/community.html) and stay on top of the announcements and new features in upcoming releases.

> [^1]: My colleague Timo, whose worked on Flink SQL from the begining, has the entire SQL standard printed on his desk and references it before any changes are merged. It's enormous.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^1]: My colleague Timo, who's worked on Flink SQL from the beginning, has the entire SQL standard printed on his desk and references it before any changes are merged. It's enormous.
```
